Add Management API > Authentication page (#914)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/ui-api/management-api/authentication/index.md

---
linkTitle: Authentication
title: Authentication for the Management API
description: How to authenticate for the management API as a user using single sign-on, plus some information for admins regarding how to set up single sign-on with your own identity provider.
weight: 20
menu:
  main:
    identifier: uiapi-managementapi-authentication
    parent: uiapi-managementapi
last_review_date: 2021-04-23
user_questions:

>   - How can I authenticate as a user for the management API?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - How can I authenticate as a user to the management API?
```

>   - How can I inspect the ID token issued for authenticating with the management API?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - How can I inspect the ID token issued for authenticating to the management API?
```

  - What requirements are there to use single sign-on with the management API?

>   - How ca I refresh my groups memberships for management API authorization?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - How can I refresh my groups memberships for management API authorization?
```

---

# Authentication for the Management API

> Here we explain how you'll authenticate against the management API as a user. For admins, we provide some information regarding the requirements for the initial [single sign-on setup](#sso-requirements) and as some [technical details](#technical-details) you might want to be interested in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we explain how you'll authenticate against the management API as a user. For admins, we provide some information regarding the requirements for the initial [single sign-on setup](#sso-requirements) and some [technical details](#technical-details) you might want to be interested in.
```

## Authenticating as a user {#user-auth}

As a user of the management API for any given installation, you need

> - A **user account** in the customer's identity provider (single sign-on).

Reviewer: 'the customer' feels vague here, because the reader would be the customer, right?

- The management API **endpoint URL** of the installation. Alternatively, the web user interface URL.

### Using kubectl gs login

> Assuming that you want to work with the API using `kubectl`, the easiest method to authenticate is using the [Giant Swarm plug-in]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/_index.md" >}}) named `gs`. It can be [installed]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/installation/index.md" >}}) easily using `krew` and is recommended for all users of the management API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming that you want to work with the API using `kubectl`, the easiest method to authenticate is by using the [Giant Swarm plug-in]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/_index.md" >}}) named `gs`. It can be [installed]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/installation/index.md" >}}) easily using `krew` and is recommended for all users of the management API.
```

To set up your `kubectl` configuration file, execute the following command:

```nohighlight
kubectl gs login <URL>
```

As a URL, use the management API endpoint URL (normally starting with `https://g8s.`) or the web user interface URL (normally starting with `https://happa.g8s.`) of the installation.

More information can be found in the [`kubectl gs login`]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/login/index.md" >}}) manual page.

[![Authentication flow](sso-auth-flow-with-kubectl-gs-login.svg)](sso-auth-flow-with-kubectl-gs-login.svg)

> In order to complete the authentication flow, `kubectl gs` will open your default web browser. If in that browser you are authenticated with your identity provider (determined e. g. via a cookie), you will see a confirmation page and can close the browser window again. However, if you weren't authenticated with your identity provider yet, you'll have to go through the authentication process you are used to. When this is done, a confirmation page will be shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to complete the authentication flow, `kubectl gs` will open your default web browser. If in that browser you are authenticated with your identity provider (e.g: via a cookie), you will see a confirmation page and can close the browser window again. However, if you weren't authenticated with your identity provider yet, you'll have to go through the authentication process you are used to. When this is done, a confirmation page will be shown.
```

Author: Do you really do `e.g` without a period after the g?

Reviewer: yeah scratch that, apparently i've been doing this wrong forever!

As a result of running the command, your `kubectl` configuration has a new context, user, and cluster entry. The context is named according to the pattern

```nohighlight
gs-<installation-name>
```

> This context is selected automatically as the current context, so you should be ready to use kubectl with the management API.

Reviewer: i can't think of a good suggestion, but the 'should' here implies that there are other steps the user may have to take (but are unclear)

When switching back to this context, it should not be necessary to go through the web-based authentication flow again. `kubectl` will automatically refresh the authentication token when needed, without your interaction.

### Alternative method

> You can alternatively initiate the single sign-on authentication directly in a browser, without a need to install the `kubectl` plug-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can alternatively initiate the single sign-on authentication directly in a browser, without the need of installing the `kubectl` plug-in.
```

> We provide a login helper utility. If you have your installation's management API endpoint URL, you can construct the utility's URL by prepending `login.` to the host name.

Reviewer: 'We provide a login helper utility.' needs more, somehow. Alternatively, it would work without it being here

The rest of the page helps you set up `kubectl` manually.

## Authenticating for programmatic access {#service-auth}

For programmatic access, for example from CI/CD pipelines, you should not rely on the above authentication mechanism. Instead, please use [service accounts](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/service-accounts-admin/).

Each Giant Swarm installation provides a service account named `automation` in the `default` namespace. The according token can be found by inspecting this `ServiceAccount` resource. It is usually named starting with `automation-token-`.

**Note:** Since the above token is extremely powerful, **we strongly recommend to create a specific service account for each integration**, binding it to specific roles and only to the required namespaces.

## Single sign-on requirements {#sso-requirements}

Giant Swarm assists all customers with setting up single sign-on (SSO) for the management API. During that process, we make sure that these requirements are met:

> - As a customer, you need to decide for an **identity provider** to use. Most enterprise-grade organizations have their solution in place. Since we use [Dex](https://github.com/dexidp/dex) as a connector between the management API and your identity provider, we can support a variety of common standards like OpenID Connect (OIDC) and LDAP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As a customer, you need to decide on an **identity provider** to use. Most enterprise-grade organizations have a solution already in place. Since we use [Dex](https://github.com/dexidp/dex) as a connector between the management API and your identity provider, we can support a variety of common standards like OpenID Connect (OIDC) and LDAP.
```

Reviewer: slight, potentially v. british thought - by saying that enterprise-grade orgs have a provider already, we imply that orgs reading this that don't aren't 'enterprise-grade', which might rub a few people the wrong way

Author: Get it. Will modify.

    For cases where no suited identity provider is available, or not yet available, we recommend to use Github, where an organization and teams can be set up and managed easily.

- Your identity provider must define a **group to be considered as admins** for the Giant Swarm installation. All members of this group automatically get administrative permissions when authenticating with the management API.

- TODO: email claim.

- All additional (non-admin) users you'll want to grant access to the management API in the future will also need to have a user account in your selected identity provider.

## Technical details {#technical-details}

Here we provide some additional details you might want to be aware of, either as a user or as an admin.

### ID-token lifetime {#id-token-ttl}

By default, ID tokens for the management API are issued with a lifetime of **{{% mapi_oidc_token_ttl_minutes %}} minutes**.

> When assigning users to groups in your identity provider, and when removing users from groups, it can take up to that {{% mapi_oidc_token_ttl_minutes %}} minutes until the change becomes effective for end users. If a user has authenticated and obtained an ID token before the change, tools like `kubectl` will use that token until it expires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When assigning users to groups in your identity provider, and when removing users from groups, it can take up to  {{% mapi_oidc_token_ttl_minutes %}} minutes until the change becomes effective for end users. If a user has authenticated and obtained an ID token before the change, tools like `kubectl` will use that token until it expires.
```

Each Giant Swarm installation provides a service account named `automation` in the `default` namespace. The according token can be found by inspecting this `ServiceAccount` resource. It is usually named starting with `automation-token-`.

**Note:** Since the above token is extremely powerful, **we strongly recommend to create a specific service account for each integration**, binding it to specific roles and only to the required namespaces.

## Single sign-on requirements {#sso-requirements}

Giant Swarm assists all customers with setting up single sign-on (SSO) for the management API. During that process, we make sure that these requirements are met:

- As a customer, you need to decide on an **identity provider** to use. Most enterprise-grade organizations have a solution already in place. Since we use [Dex](https://github.com/dexidp/dex) as a connector between the management API and your identity provider, we can support a variety of common standards like OpenID Connect (OIDC) and LDAP.

>     For cases where no suited identity provider is available, or not yet available, we recommend to use Github, where an organization and teams can be set up and managed easily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For cases where no suitable identity provider is available, or not yet available, we recommend to use Github, where an organization and teams can be set up and managed easily.
```

- Your identity provider must define a **group to be considered as admins** for the Giant Swarm installation. All members of this group automatically get administrative permissions when authenticating with the management API.

- TODO: email claim.

- All additional (non-admin) users you'll want to grant access to the management API in the future will also need to have a user account in your selected identity provider.

## Technical details {#technical-details}

Here we provide some additional details you might want to be aware of, either as a user or as an admin.

### ID-token lifetime {#id-token-ttl}

By default, ID tokens for the management API are issued with a lifetime of **{{% mapi_oidc_token_ttl_minutes %}} minutes**.

> When assigning users to groups in your identity provider, and when removing users from groups, it can take up to  {{% mapi_oidc_token_ttl_minutes %}} minutes until the change becomes effective for end users. If a user has authenticated and obtained an ID token before the change, tools like `kubectl` will use that token until it expires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When assigning users to groups in your identity provider, and when removing users from groups, it can take up to {{% mapi_oidc_token_ttl_minutes %}} minutes until the change becomes effective for end users. If a user has authenticated and obtained an ID token before the change, tools like `kubectl` will use that token until it expires.
```

excuse me, i seem to have introduced a rogue space with my last suggestion

As a user of the Management API for any given installation, you need

- A **user account** in the identity provider used by the installation (single sign-on).
- The Management API **endpoint URL** of the installation. Alternatively, the web user interface URL.

### Using `kubectl gs login` {#kubectl-gs-login}

Assuming that you want to work with the API using `kubectl`, we recommend you install the [Giant Swarm plug-in]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/_index.md" >}}) named `gs`. It can be [installed]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/installation/index.md" >}}) and updated using `krew`.

To set up your `kubectl` configuration with a context for your Giant Swarm installation's Management API, execute the following command:

```nohighlight
kubectl gs login <URL>
```

As a URL, use the Management API endpoint URL (normally starting with `https://g8s.`) or the web user interface URL (normally starting with `https://happa.g8s.`) of the installation.

More information can be found in the [`kubectl gs login`]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/login/index.md" >}}) manual page.

[![Authentication flow](sso-auth-flow-with-kubectl-gs-login.svg)](sso-auth-flow-with-kubectl-gs-login.svg)

> In order to complete the authentication flow, `kubectl gs` will open your default web browser. If in that browser you are authenticated with your identity provider (determined e. g. via a cookie), you will see a confirmation page and can close the browser window again. However, if you weren't authenticated with your identity provider yet, you'll have to go through the authentication process you are used to. When this is done, a confirmation page will be shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to complete the authentication flow, `kubectl gs` will open your default web browser. If in that browser you are authenticated with your identity provider (determined e.g. via a cookie), you will see a confirmation page and can close the browser window again. However, if you weren't authenticated with your identity provider yet, you'll have to go through the authentication process you are used to. When this is done, a confirmation page will be shown.
```

We provide a web-based login helper utility, available under a URL specific for each installation. If you have your installation's Management API endpoint URL, you can construct the utility's URL by prepending `login.` to the host name.

If, for example, your Management API URL is

```nohighlight
https://g8s.base.domain.tld
```

then the login utility can be accessed via

```nohighlight
https://login.g8s.base.domain.tld
```

The tool will immediately redirect you to your identity provider's authentication flow where you proceed providing your credentials as usual. After that, or if you are already authenticated in the current browser, you will be redirected to a resulting page.

The screenshot shows an example of that result page.

![Login helper screenshot](login-utility-results.png)

Here you can inspect the details that will be passed to the Management API as part of the ID token. You can use this to verify the details coming from your identity provider, especially the `email` (which is used as your user identifier) and `groups` claim.

> This page will also present your Management API endpoint's certification authority (CA) certificate. In order to connect to your Management API endpoint, you should add this CA certificate to your client's trusted (root) certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page will also present your Management API endpoint's certificate authority (CA) certificate. In order to connect to your Management API endpoint, you should add this CA certificate to your client's trusted (root) certificates.
```
